So we want to use nodejs
and the first important step is that we install it and for that you have to visit
nodejs.org.
There you'll find an installer,
in my case here it picked the right one for my operating system, MacOS but you will also find a version for
Windows
if you're visiting this page on Windows or you manually choose a different version and you can of course
follow along no matter which operating system you're using,
the code you write and the steps you need to take to install nodejs are exactly the same.
You simply download the latest version here, 10.9 in my case and you then simply save it anywhere and run the installer
this gives you. Now simply follow through all the steps which are mentioned in the installer, accept the
license agreement and so on
so simply click through that,
install it on your machine
and once it is completed, you already got everything you will need to write
nodejs
code.
So this is super fast, it's done here,
you can close this now
and now, how do we use nodejs?
Well the easiest way of using it is to open up your local terminal or on windows, powershell or the
command prompt. In that terminal, as a first step simply run node -v, like this,
this should show you the version of nodejs you installed.
Now with that being executed, you can now use node just like that to enter a special input mode,
the so-called repl I'll come back to that where you can execute code and have it parsed by node on the
fly.
You can use this as a calculator, simply type two plus two to see the result
or you can write whole javascript programs there.
Now I won't do that
so you can quit it with control c
and instead let's write a real script which we can execute with nodejs so that we can also see what
we can do with it. For that, create a new folder anywhere on your computer and open that folder in your
favorite IDE or code editor.
Now here I am using Visual Studio code,
you can find that on code.visualstudio.com,
this is a great IDE which I strongly recommend using,
it's free,
it is really built for you such with javascript code
it will work great and you can simply download it from this page,
as I said for free, simply walk through the installer,
it's also available for Windows and so on.
Walk through the installer it gives you
and then once it's installed,
simply start it and open that new folder you created somewhere on your computer.
This will be your project folder for this very first quick app or script
we're going to write. Now your Visual Studio code might look a bit different,
I'm in fullscreen mode which is why you don't see any menu items here at the top
and I also got two important things installed here.
The first one is the theme and you can hit command shift P or control shift P on Windows to go to that
quick command interface here and there if you type theme, then you can go to the preferences color theme and
choose which theme you want to use and I'm using the dark plus theme here,
so if you want to get the exact same coloring, you can choose that.
And I also installed an extension,
you can view the extension menu by going to view extensions or if you have on the left a menu, you can
also click on the extensions tab there but view extensions will do or the shortcut you see there
and there I installed the material icon theme, this theme here. I already got that installed
and this gives me some special file icons and so on.
You don't need that,
you just can use it if you want to, you have the exact same layout and thereafter you can go back to the view
explorer here.
Now this is then my setup, I get a gitignore file here since I'll use git for version management,
you don't need that
and with that let's simply create a new file here with control n, command n or by clicking that icon
here and then simply give it any name you want, like
first-app.js, .js is of course important because we're creating a javascript app here. Now in
there,
we can run any code
nodejs is capable of executing
and for this, I will write a simple script.
I will simply write console log
hello from nodejs.
Now you could write this in the browser too, the browser would be capable of running this and it would
log thiss in the javascript console in your browser dev tools.
Now you can also execute this with nodejs though. For this,
go back to your terminal or command prompt and make sure you navigate into that new folder you created
with the help of CD and so on,
you can alternatively also go back to visual studio code and there under view,
you can open that terminal and that will give you your default system terminal already navigated into
that folder,
so that's a bit more convenient.
And then here you can run
node
and now
first-app.js,
so that filename. If you now hit enter,
you should see hello from nodejs here because this executes your code and this already shows you
that node is javascript on your computer.
This is not using a browser, it's just using the internal engine,
the extended internal javascript engine used by the browser to execute your code locally, totally outside
of a browser.
and of course we can also do more than just logging something.
Let's for example write this text to a file.
For this, we can import something from the nodejs environment,
I mentioned that it would add new features to javascript, right.
You have to import them and I'll come back to the detailed import syntax and which features exist a
little bit later,
for now just follow along to have this first quick demo and create a new constant, I'll
also give you a brief refresher about constants in Javascript in this course and then type require
fs. Fs stands for file system and this syntax simply imports some file system functionalities into this
javascript file so that we can use these functionalities there. We can now use fs write file sync here
to create a new file and this takes a couple of arguments and the first argument is the path where you
want to store that file and that also includes the file name.
Now I want to create it in that same folder so I will simply name it
hello.text for example
and the second argument is the data we want to put in there and there I'll just put hello from nodejs.
With this if we now save this and we re-execute this with node first-app.js,
you should have a hello.txt file here and this gives you the text written in there
and this is something you couldn't do in the browser because there
you can't access your local file system and obviously it's features like this which you need to then
also create a server which we don't have at this point
by the way, this is not a website obviously, it's just some utility script and this is something we can
do with nodejs.
Well this was a first quick demo, we'll learn all the cool features and how this works and what exactly this
syntax is throughout the course of course.